Get tests working again (#108)
phyloref/clade-ontology: AGENTS.md

# AGENTS.md

This file provides guidance to AI coding agents (Claude Code, Codex, etc.) when working with code in this repository.

## Overview

> The Clade Ontology is an ontology of exemplar phyloreferences curated from peer-reviewed publications. It stores phyloreferences (computable clade definitions) as PHYX files that are converted to OWL/JSON-LD for reasoning with an OWL reasoner (JPhyloRef + JFact++).

Author: ```suggestion
The Clade Ontology is an ontology of exemplar phyloreferences curated from PhyloRegnum (https://www.phyloregnum.org/) and peer-reviewed publications. It stores phyloreferences (computable clade definitions) as PHYX files that are converted to n-triples and OWL/JSON-LD for reasoning with an OWL reasoner. We use JPhyloRef (https://github.com/phyloref/jphyloref) to wrap [Elk](https://liveontologies.github.io/elk-reasoner/).
```

> The Clade Ontology is an ontology of exemplar phyloreferences curated from PhyloRegnum (https://www.phyloregnum.org/) and peer-reviewed publications. It stores phyloreferences (computable clade definitions) as PHYX files that are converted to n-triples and OWL/JSON-LD for reasoning with an OWL reasoner. We use JPhyloRef (https://github.com/phyloref/jphyloref) to wrap [Elk](https://liveontologies.github.io/elk-reasoner/).

Author: ```suggestion
The Clade Ontology is an ontology of exemplar phyloreferences curated from PhyloRegnum (https://www.phyloregnum.org/) and peer-reviewed publications. It stores phyloreferences (computable clade definitions) in the Phyx format (https://github.com/phyloref/phyx.js/, https://www.phyloref.org/phyx.js/, https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.12618 -- JSON Schema and JSON-LD contexts available at https://www.phyloref.org/phyx.js/context/) that are converted to n-triples and OWL/JSON-LD for reasoning with an OWL reasoner. We use JPhyloRef (https://github.com/phyloref/jphyloref) to wrap [Elk](https://liveontologies.github.io/elk-reasoner/).
```

```

**Enable slow tests (requires Java + JPhyloRef):**
```bash
RUN_SLOW_TESTS=1 npm test
# Optional env vars: JVM_ARGS, JPHYLOREF_ARGS, MAX_INTERNAL_SPECIFIERS, MAX_EXTERNAL_SPECIFIERS
```

**Download test dependencies (JPhyloRef JAR and Phyx JSON schema):**
```bash
cd test && bash download.sh
```

**Build the Clade Ontology:**
```bash
node phyx2ontology/phyx2ontology.js phyx/ > CLADO.json
node phyx2ontology/phyx2ontology.js phyx/ --no-phylogenies > CLADO.json
```

**Convert a PhyloRegnum database dump to Phyx files:**
```bash
node regnum2phyx/regnum2phyx.js dump.json -o output_dir/
node regnum2phyx/regnum2phyx.js dump.json -o output_dir/ --filenames regnum-id
```

## Architecture

### Data Pipeline

```
PhyloRegnum DB dump (JSON)
    → regnum2phyx.js → PHYX files (.json in phyx/)
    → phyx2ontology.js → CLADO.json (OWL/JSON-LD)
    → JPhyloRef (Java) → reasoning/test results
```

### Key Directories

- **`data/`** — Git-ignored directory for raw PhyloRegnum database dumps (JSON files) used as input to `regnum2phyx.js`. Not committed.
- **`phyx/`** — Curated PHYX files organized by source:
  - `from_papers/` — Phyloreferences from peer-reviewed papers (e.g., `Brochu 2003/`)

>   - `phylonym/` — Files from the PhyloNym database

Author: ```suggestion
  - `phylonym/` — Files from the Phylonym database, PhyloRegnum (https://www.phyloregnum.org/)
```

  - `encrypted/` — Git-crypt encrypted files (skipped during processing)

> - **`phyx2ontology/phyx2ontology.js`** — Converts PHYX files to a single Clade Ontology JSON-LD. Reads PHYX files, wraps them via `@phyloref/phyx`, and emits JSON-LD to STDOUT.

Author: ```suggestion
- **`phyx2ontology/phyx2ontology.js`** — Converts Phyx files to a single Clade Ontology JSON-LD. Reads Phyx files, wraps them via `@phyloref/phyx`, and emits JSON-LD to STDOUT.
```
